In this section the core characteristics and assumptions of the model
PyPSA-Eur-Sec are presented. More detailed descriptions of specific sectors,
energy carriers, renewable potentials, transmission infrastructure modelling,
and mathematical problem formulation are covered in the supplementary material
under \crefrange{sec:si:model-overview}{sec:si:math}.

The European sector-coupled energy system model PyPSA-Eur-Sec uses linear
\textbf{optimisation} to minimise total annual operational and investment costs
subject to technical and physical constraints, assuming perfect competition and
perfect foresight over one uninterrupted year of 3-hourly operation (see
\cref{sec:si:math} for mathematical formulation). In this study, we used the
historical year 2013 for weather-dependent inputs. Apart from existing
electricity and gas transmission infrastructure and hydroelectric facilities, no
other existing assets are assumed (\textit{greenfield optimisation} or
\textit{overnight scenario}), so that the model assumes a long-term equilibrium
in a market with perfect competition and foresight, and disregards pathway
dependencies. Cost assumptions are taken, where possible, from predictions for
the year 2030 by the Danish Energy Agency (see
\cref{sec:si:costs}).\cite{DEA} The model is implemented in the free and open software
framework Python for Power System Analysis (PyPSA).\cite{brownPyPSAPython2018}

PyPSA-Eur-Sec builds upon the model from Brown et
al.,~\cite{brownSynergiesSector2018} which covered electricity, heating in
buildings and ground transport in Europe with one node per country.
PyPSA-Eur-Sec adds biomass on the supply side, industry, agriculture, aviation
and shipping on the demand side, and higher spatial resolution to suitably
assess infrastructure requirements. In this study, the European continent is
divided into 181 regions. Unavoidable process emissions, feedstock demands in
the chemicals industry and the need for dense fuels for aviation, also required
the addition of a detailed representation of the carbon cycles, including carbon
capture from industry processes, biomass combustion and directly from the air
(DAC).

\cref{fig:multisector} gives an \textbf{overview} of the supply, transmission,
storage and demand sectors implemented in the model. To render interactions in
the sector-coupled energy system, we model the energy carriers electricity,
heat, methane, hydrogen, carbon dioxide and liquid hydrocarbons (oil, naphtha)
across the different energy sectors. Generator capacities (for onshore wind,
offshore wind, utility-scale and rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV), biomass,
hydroelectricity, oil and natural gas), heating capacities (for heat pumps,
resistive heaters, gas boilers, combined heat and power (CHP) plants and solar
thermal collector units), synthetic fuel production (electrolysers, methanation,
Fischer-Tropsch, steam methane reforming, fuel cells), storage capacities
(stationary and electric vehicle batteries, hydrogen storage in caverns and
steel tanks, pit thermal energy storage, pumped-hydro and reservoirs, and
carbon-based fuels like methane and oil), carbon capture (from industry process
emissions, steam methane reforming, CHP plants and directly from the air), and
transport capacities of electricity transmission lines, new hydrogen and
repurposed natural gas pipelines are all subject to optimisation, as well as the
operational dispatch of each unit in each represented hour.

\textbf{Exogenous assumptions} in the model include a constant demand for the
different materials and energy carriers in each sector, the extent of land
transport electrification, the use of liquified hydrogen as shipping fuel and
kerosene in aviation, the ratio of district heating to decentralised heating in
densely populated regions, efficiency gains due to building retrofitting,
hydroelectricity capacities (for reservoir and run-of-river generators and
pumped hydro storage).

The time series and potentials of variable renewable \textbf{energy supply}
(wind, solar, hydro, ambient heat) are computed from historical weather data
(ERA5 \cite{ecmwf} and SARAH-2 \cite{SARAH}). Potentials for wind and solar
generation take various land eligibility constraints into account, e.g.~suitable
land types and exclusion zones around populated and protected areas. As long as
emissions can be offset by negative emission technologies and sequestration
potentials are not exhausted, limited amounts of fossil oil and gas can still be
used as primary energy supply. While no assumption about the origin of fossil
energy is made, imports of renewables-based products into Europe are not
considered.

The full \textbf{transmission} network for European electricity transport is
taken from the electricity-only model version,
PyPSA-Eur,\cite{horschPyPSAEurOpen2018} and is clustered down to 181
representative regions based on the methodology used in Hörsch and
Brown\cite{Hoersch2017} and Frysztacki et al.~\cite{frysztackiStrongEffect2021}.
This level of aggregation reflects, at the upper end, the computational limit to
solve a temporally resolved sector-coupled energy system optimisation problem
and, at the lower end, the requirements to preserve the most important
transmission corridors that cause bottlenecks and limit the system integration
of renewables. Power flows are modelled using a cycle-based load flow
linearization from Hörsch et al.~\cite{horschLinearOptimal2018} that
significantly improves computational performance. Hydrogen pipeline flows assume
a simple transport model. This means that while incoming and outbound flows must
balance for each region and pipes can transport hydrogen only within their
capacity limits, no further physical gaseous flow constraints are applied. The
potential for gas pipeline retrofitting is estimated based on consolidated
network data from the SciGRID\_gas project \cite{plutaSciGRIDGas2022a} such that
for every unit of gas pipeline decommissioned, 60\% of its capacity becomes
available for hydrogen transport.\cite{gasforclimateEuropeanHydrogen2020}

For \textbf{industry}, we assume that the demand for materials (such as steel,
cement, and high-value chemicals) remain constant. The assumed industry
transformation is characterised by electrification, process switching to
low-emission alternatives (e.g. switching to hydrogen for direct reduction of
iron ore\cite{voglAssessmentHydrogen2018}), more recycling of steel, plastics
and aluminium\cite{circular_economy}, fuel switching for high- and
mid-temperature process heat to biomass and methane, use synthetic fuels for
ammonia and organic chemicals, and allow carbon capture. It is assumed that no
plastic or other non-energy product is sequestered in landfill, but that all
carbon in plastics eventually makes its way back to the atmosphere, either
through combustion or decay; this approach is stricter than other models.
\cite{in-depth_2018}

The \textbf{transport} sector comprises light and heavy road, rail, shipping and
aviation transport. For road and rail, electrification and fuel cell vehicles
are available. For shipping, liquid hydrogen is considered. Aviation consumes
kerosene whose origin (fossil or synthetic) is endogenously determined. Half of
the battery electric vehicle fleet for passenger transport is assumed to engage
in demand response schemes as well as vehicle-to-grid operation.

The \textbf{buildings} sector includes decentral heat supply in individual
housing as well as centralised district heating for urban areas. Heating demand
can be met through air- and ground-sourced heat pumps, gas boilers, CHPs,
resitive heaters as well as waste heat from synthetic fuel production in
district heating networks. For district heating networks, seasonal heat storage
options are also available. Efficiency gains from building retrofitting are
exogenous to the model based on Zeyen et al.\cite{zeyenMitigatingHeat2021}

For \textbf{biomass}, only waste and residues from agriculture and forestry are
permitted, using the medium potential estimates from the JRC ENSPRESO database.
\cite{ruizENSPRESOOpen2019} This results in 347~TWh per year of biogas that can
be upgraded and 1186~TWh per year of solid biomass residues and waste for the
whole of Europe. Biomass can be used in combined electricity and heat generation
with and without CCS, as well as to provide low- to medium-temperature process
heat in industry.

\textbf{Carbon capture} is needed in the model both to capture and sequester
process emissions with a fossil origin, such as those from calcination of fossil
limestone in the cement industry, as well as to use carbon for the production of
hydrocarbons for dense transport fuels and as a chemical feedstock, for example
to produce plastic. \co can be captured from exhaust gases (industry process
emissions, steam methane reforming, CHP plants) or by direct air capture.
Captured \co can be used to produce synthetic hydrocarbons via the Sabatier or
Fischer-Tropsch process. Up to 200 Mt\co/a may be sequestered underground, which
is sufficient to capture process emissions but limits the system's reliance on
negative emission technologies.